These Tory Stories podcasts aim to act as counters to the universal Whig version of
history, observing history and the world from the viewpoint of an 18th Century Tory.
Their focus will be on the Industrial Revolution and the
Tory achievements of 1660-1832.
Tory Story V – Ranking the Greatest Prime Ministers
My book “Britain’s Greatest Prime Minister – Lord Liverpool” makes the claim that
Liverpool was the greatest of Britain’s Prime Ministers.
In an earlier podcast, I promised to discuss that claim, and to place him among
Britain’s other great Prime Ministers, producing a ranking at the end.
I shall not attempt to discuss all 57 (as of this week) Prime Ministers, only the
ones which have a reasonable claim to rank near the top.
This has the advantage of not requiring me to make invidious distinctions between
recent holders of that office, since I think observers of all political stripes
would agree with me that the eight who have occupied the office in the last 33 years
have been pretty undistinguished, with Lady Thatcher the last with
any claim to greatness.
I shall discuss the great and near-great in chronological order; this is both logical
and leaves the more contentious entries towards the end.
In total, there are 15 contenders for greatness, with some included for their
reputation rather than their actual achievements.
In deference to “Britain’s Greatest Prime Minister” I shall
leave Liverpool until last.
Walpole
Sir Robert Walpole, first, is always said to have invented the office of prime
minister. Actually, I could quibble – other statesmen, such as the Earls of Clarendon,
Danby and Rochester, had performed prime ministerial functions from the Restoration.
However, Walpole was operating with a weaker monarchy – indeed, one that for his
first six years (George I) did not speak English -- and was its longest-serving
occupant, with over 20 years in office.
Walpole rose to power by dealing deftly with the financial and political blow-back
from the South Sea Bubble’s collapse, imposing rough justice on the company’s
management, side-lining several of his rivals who had been more closely involved
in the South Sea’s scheming and through his friends at the Bank of England providing
enough of a bailout that there was no long-term collapse in investor sentiment.
Once this was done, then provided he kept Royal favour and kept the country at peace
Walpole could stay in power indefinitely.
He was an excellent man of business and prized the virtue of moderation,
fashionable at that time in contrast to the “enthusiasm” of the previous century.
Through his Sinking Fund and twenty years of peace, he stabilized the government
debt, reducing annual interest payments by 27%.
He established an alliance with France, already a non-traditional foreign policy,
that proved surprisingly durable, although when war came in 1739, initially with
Spain, he proved an ineffective war minister.
On the debit side, with the help of George I and George II, he established Britain as
an effective one-party state, with Tories barred from power altogether and dissident
Whigs relegated to futile opposition.
His social legislation also tended towards the repressive, as did his tax policy, and
the 1723 “Black Act” introduced capital punishment for more than 50 working-class
crimes. In Scotland and Ireland his corruption and repression were worse than
in England, with the “Wood’s Halfpence” swindle a black spot.
On the other hand, he used a light touch in regulating the American colonies and his
overall Whiggery and tolerance of Dissent were much appreciated there.
Overall, nicely self-described as “no saint, no Spartan, no reformer” Walpole
left Britain richer and more stable than he found it, but
also more corrupt and less open.
Pelham
Henry Pelham, Walpole’s successor but one, was the brains and financial acumen in his
family, while his older brother Thomas, Duke of Newcastle managed the family’s
extensive patronage and foreign policy.
In many ways Pelham was an improved version of Walpole.
He pursued the same policy of peace, economy and low taxes, but he was not
personally corrupt. He was a less outgoing personality than Walpole, and not an
especially good Parliamentary speaker, but like Walpole was a superb administrator and
excellent with finance.
Initially, Pelham was subordinate to the autocratic Carteret who once remarked of
him: “He was only a chief clerk to Sir Robert Walpole, and why he should expect to
be more under me, I can’t imagine; he did his drudgery and he shall do mine.” Pelham
achieved full power in 1746, before which he was faced with the Young Pretender’s
rebellion, which from Scotland reached Derby before it turned back.
Pelham’s solution was to recall the King’s younger son the Duke of Cumberland and the
British force from Flanders.
Cumberland finally defeated the Pretender at Culloden in April 1746, but then
undertook a policy of suppressing the Highland clans, over Pelham’s opposition.
Pelham established the Whigs with a huge Commons majority at the 1747 election, a
position repeated in that of 1754, just after his death.
He also ended the War of the Austrian Succession, reduced public spending
sharply, modernised the calendar and reduced the interest on the National Debt,
with the help of the financier Sampson Gideon converting it in 1751 into the
famous Consols, paying 3½% until 1757, 3% thereafter.
Overall, Pelham was a quiet but very good Walpolean prime minister.
Chatham
William Pitt the Elder, first Earl of Chatham has one claim to prime ministerial
greatness: he came up with the strategy that won the Seven Years War, added immense
territory to the British Empire and made Britain for the first time the leading
international power.
No other prime minister, not his son, not Churchill, nor Liverpool can make such a
claim. However, he was uninterested in domestic or economic policy, and in his
later years dangerously encouraged the worst elements in the American colonies,
justifying their disruption with radical and inflammatory rhetoric.
His second prime ministerial term was cut short by illness but was very
undistinguished; the Duke of Grafton, who took over from him, was a considerable
improvement. Overall, he was a flawed genius, who deserves to rank above the many
mediocrities but not right at the top.
Pitt
To nineteenth century observers, William Pitt the younger was the greatest prime
minister. His supremacy continued to be acknowledged until the World War II
generation. Only more recently have mild doubts arisen.
Pitt’s term in office breaks naturally into two halves, with the outbreak of war in
1793 separating them.
In the first half, he was a reforming prime minister who broke
new ground in several important ways.
He was the first prime minister to implement fully the ideas of “Economical
Reform” propagated by the Whigs of the early 1780s.
He eliminated many sinecures and, more important, set standards of public service
selection and promotion by merit that were to become important during the difficult
war years and thereafter.
Pitt was also the first prime minister to implement Adam Smith’s principles of free
trade and low, transparent taxation.
Lower tariffs combined with a decline in smuggling to produce a substantial increase
in public revenue.
Contemporaries were also impressed by Pitt’s 1786 establishment of the Sinking
Fund on a solider base than that of Walpole.
Modern commentators scoff at this, but the Sinking Fund maintained Britain’s credit
rating and its ability to raise money during the late 1790s, when national
insolvency could easily have occurred.
Among Pitt’s most important reforms were those in the public service, including the
Army, the Ordnance and the Navy.
Bills were paid on time, cash management techniques were implemented, and the Navy
was brought up to a higher state of efficiency than ever before, essential
during the first decade of war.
Pitt is often thought to have been almost alone in the early years of his government,
with only aristocratic and idle Whigs for support.
However Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Gower was a Tory voice of immense
experience until 1794, having been in Cabinets on and off since 1757 and
overseeing the development of Britain’s canal network in the 1760s.
Then Charles Jenkinson joined in 1786 (reaching the Cabinet in 1791) and
gradually the government became both more Tory and more efficient, William Grenville
and the Tory Robert Dundas joining the Cabinet after 1790, and Portland, Spencer
and Burke joining with conservative Whigs in 1794 as Gower retired.
Pitt was not an effective war minister.
His financial management was poor, attempting to raise too much of the war
needs through borrowing, incurring a deficit of 16% of GDP in 1797 and raising
the money through an untested merchant bank Boyd, Benfield that went bankrupt.
Even his invention of the Income Tax in 1798 failed to solve the problem; it was
only after Addington invented income tax withholding in 1803 that income tax yields
rose to their proper level and budget deficits declined.
Pitt’s military strategy was also ineffectual, assembling repeated coalitions
of Europe’s major powers, thereby attempting to win the war in one campaign.
With France possessing better generals and generally better military organization,
campaigns against it confined to a single year universally brought defeat.
Pitt’s second ministry was notably fractious and unsuccessful.
Indeed, since he lost the support of Sidmouth/Addington in July 1805, he would
almost certainly have suffered defeat had he survived to meet the House of Commons
for the 1806 session.
His fine reputation therefore rests on the first half of his first ministry.
I believe he was better than Lloyd George or Gladstone, but not as good a war
minister as Churchill nor as good a minister overall as Liverpool.
Peel
Sir Robert Peel was the son of a very rich textile entrepreneur and Tory MP, an
extremely intelligent man who was told so too often in his early years.
He was a successful Home Secretary, but his man-management skills were non-existent,
as first became apparent with his failure to hold together the large Commons majority
that Liverpool had left his successors.
Peel’s first period as prime minister in 1834-35 produced the “Tamworth manifesto,”
abandoning the beliefs of much of his party’s base.
His second government of 1841-46 also showed a disdain for mainstream Tories and
a liking for “reformers” who were later to join the Liberals.
Peel’s 1842 restoration of the Income Tax gave the state a solid fiscal basis, which
he used for ever more aggressive moves towards mostly unilateral free trade.
Peel’s free trade moves culminated in the 1846 Repeal of the Corn Laws, which split
his party and ended his government.
In the very long term, Repeal and unilateral free trade doomed British
agriculture once American competition became effective in the 1870s and ended
British industrial supremacy as competitors built up their
industries behind high tariff walls.
Peel and his Whig successors grossly mishandled the Irish potato famine,
pursuing the irrelevant remedy of Corn Law abolition while failing to implement
short-term relief measures that had been second nature in the
British famines of the 1790s.
As a prime minister, Peel was at best average.
Palmerston
Palmerston had gained a good grasp of economics at Edinburgh University.
He was an admirable Secretary at War for 19 years from 1809.
Regrettably he resigned from Wellington’s Cabinet with the other Canningites in 1828,
then negotiated successfully with the Whigs, who lacked Ministerial experience,
becoming Foreign Secretary in
1830, remaining so in Whig
administrations for 22 years.
Palmerston’s foreign policy was an extension of Canning’s: opposed to the
continental “autocracies,” generally supportive of revolutions, whether or not
they had genuine popular backing, and bombastic and prickly when it came to
British interests. Overall, he was a less successful upholder of British power and
prestige than would be Salisbury, in more difficult circumstances forty years later.
After two years as Home Secretary, Palmerston succeeded to the Premiership
with a mandate to win the Crimean War, for which he had agitated.
This he did successfully, beginning a decade in power in which he was the
country’s most popular statesman, while blocking further attempts at parliamentary
reform or indeed reform in general.
While Palmerston’s foreign policy followed Canning, his domestic and economic policies
followed Liverpool; consequently, his Whig followers, notably Gladstone, were
discontented but the country thoroughly approved.
Palmerston was a much-loved prime minister in easy times but, being in the wrong
party, did little to solve Britain’s structural problems.
Disraeli
Disraeli was a brilliant parliamentary orator, whose invective did much to remove
Peel over the Corn Laws, but as prime minister he can be summed up as an
Arch-Mediocrity, the epithet he had applied to Liverpool.
His first short term in 1868 achieved nothing other than a massive and unexpected
election loss based on the new franchise he had defied party principle to institute.
Disraeli’s second term included the purchase of the Suez Canal, a useful move
that secured British communications for the next 80 years, and a flashy foreign policy
“triumph” at the Congress of Berlin that gained Cyprus but not much else.
His colonial policy led to British over-extension, with defeats in Afghanistan
and South Africa in 1879-80.
Domestically, the Disraeli government’s achievements included one disaster, the
Trades Disputes Act of 1875, which by giving trades unions legal immunity
poisoned British industrial relations for the next century.
Economically, Disraeli’s second term was blighted by the post-1873 downturn, which
he failed to alleviate or understand.
By the end of his second term, following the protectionist German tariff of 1879, it
should have been obvious that unilateral free trade was now devastating British
agriculture and doing long-term damage to its industrial position, but Disraeli
failed to return to the protectionism he had espoused before 1852.
Disraeli was a below-average prime minister, albeit a rather better novelist.
Gladstone
Gladstone was the son of a major slave-owner, who bought more slave
properties at discounts when compensation for slave-owners was proposed in 1824 and
received £106,769 compensation from the Slave Compensation Commission, the largest
sum paid out by the Commission.
Gladstone served as prime minister for more than 12 years, over a period of nearly 26
years, reinventing himself several times, moving from
right-wing Tory to radical Liberal.
As Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gladstone was much admired, but his reputation is
overblown. By the time he took over, the economy was expanding rapidly and the debt
to GDP ratio was far below its level earlier in the century.
Gladstone was a firm believer in free trade; his sponsorship of the
Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860 marked that doctrine’s apogee; the U.S.
Morrill Tariff of 1862 made Britain’s free-trade strictly unilateral.
Gladstone’s first ministry of 1868-74 was his best, passing major reforms such as the
1870 Education Act, the abolition of Army commission purchase and the Ballot Act
establishing a secret ballot.
He also interested himself in Ireland, disestablishing the Church of Ireland and
passing a moderate Land Act.
In foreign policy, he was pacific, which left Britain as a powerless spectator
during the Franco-Prussian war.
In 1880 Gladstone conducted the first popular election campaign and won a
substantial majority. He passed a radical Irish Land Act, which damaged property
rights without pacifying the Irish, as well as a third Reform Act, which improved on
the first two by including negotiations with the opposition and compromises on
contentious issues.
In foreign policy, he became increasingly moralist, and suffered a major PR defeat in
1885 with the loss of General Charles Gordon in the Sudan.
Gladstone then turned to Irish Home Rule, to attract the support from Irish MPs that
would bring him back to power.
This was a sensible measure, that would have been much better proposed in 1868 or
1880, with a fresh electoral mandate.
As it was, by introducing the measure for reasons of parliamentary expediency,
failing to consider properly the position of Ulster, and then re-introducing the
measure without a majority
in 1893, Gladstone made the
question politically toxic.
Gladstone’s highly successful first ministry and moderately successful second
ministry must be balanced against foreign policy failures and what eventually became
disaster in Ireland.
With a discount for governing in mostly quiescent times, he should rank modestly
above average, above Disraeli but below Palmerston and Salisbury.
Salisbury
Salisbury was prime minister for 13 years and 8 months, the post-Liverpool longevity
record. For most of that time, he also held the Foreign Secretaryship.
Uniquely among prime ministers, Salisbury had set out a clearly defined political
philosophy in the 1860s,
which included studies of the
younger Pitt and Castlereagh.
He then took the India Office in Derby’s last administration of 1866 but resigned in
protest at the Second Reform Bill.
Salisbury returned to the India Office in 1874, transitioning to the Foreign Office
in 1878. When Disraeli died in 1881, he and Northcote succeeded him jointly in the
Conservative leadership, but it soon became obvious that Salisbury was the dominant
partner. His masterly negotiation of the Third Reform Act secured his position as
prime minister when Gladstone resigned in 1885.
Salisbury was a truly superior foreign policy prime minister.
He expanded the Empire, acquiring territories of 6 million square miles
containing 100 million people.
In Europe, he rejected close entangling alliances, attempting to work in a balanced
manner with the major European autocracies as Castlereagh had.
Only the Boer War spotted his record.
Domestically, Salisbury was modestly successful.
He carried out a reorganization of local government, but his domestic reforms were
often in tension with his fundamental beliefs, as in his creation of the leftist
London County Council in 1888.
In Ireland, he followed a policy of “killing Home Rule by kindness” which did
not achieve its central objective.
Salisbury’s major missed opportunity was in economics.
Salisbury had no intellectual commitment to unilateral free trade, so an Imperial
Preference scheme could have emerged in 1895 or even in 1887, when Salisbury
enjoyed a safe majority and could have pushed it through.
Overall, Salisbury was the best of Queen Victoria’s prime ministers, in an
environment that was becoming more difficult.
Asquith
Asquith was Britain’s first prime minister with working-class origins, achieving
academic distinction at Oxford.
Home Secretary under Gladstone and Rosebery, he then married the intelligent,
witty, fashionable and expensive Margot Tennant, the first politically active prime
ministerial spouse.
After two years as Chancellor of Exchequer, Asquith occupied the premiership for 8½
years, during which the
office’s requirements took
on their modern heavy level.
However, Asquith’s response to them didn’t.
He carried on an active social life, much recreational reading, excessive alcohol
consumption and an intense but probably Platonic love affair with Venetia Stanley,
to whom his letters involved outrageous breaches of the new Official Secrets Act.
When not too drunk, he was an excellent Parliamentary speaker, a good administrator
and a very quick study, mastering legislative detail with ease.
With help from Lloyd George and Churchill Asquith was the true founder of the modern
Welfare State, introducing Old Age Pensions in 1908 and a National Insurance scheme in
1911. What’s more, given Britain’s remarkable fiscal strength at this time, he
managed to do this and build up the world’s most powerful fleet of Dreadnought
battleships without running budget deficits or raising taxes beyond a modest top
combined rate of 13% income tax and “super tax” in 1914.
There are two blots on Asquith’s peacetime record.
First, he allowed Lloyd George to inflame the 1909-11 Budget/Constitutional crisis by
excessive class war rhetoric, which poisoned relations between the parties,
making the 1912-14 Irish Home Rule impasse impossible to settle on compromise terms.
Second, he not only deepened the French and Russian alliances, but (highly
unconstitutionally) held military conversations with the French without
informing his Cabinet, making British participation in any war almost inevitable.
Once war came, Asquith’s leadership was only intermittently effective.
With all his qualities, his departure in December 1916 was overdue.
Despite his fatherhood of the welfare state, Asquith does not deserve to rank
much above average.
Nevertheless, one cannot help liking him.
Lloyd George
Lloyd George also came from a poor background, but unlike Asquith he traded on
it throughout his life.
A fiery Radical Welsh MP and a Boer War pacifist, he was a capable President of the
Board of Trade before becoming Chancellor of the Exchequer.
His 1911 National Insurance “ninepence for fourpence” scheme was well designed and
became the foundation of the modern Welfare State.
Throughout his career, Lloyd George had a phobia about the landed rich – not the rich
in general, just those with inherited land, whom he consistently demonized.
His 1909 Budget included a Land Tax with modest yield but major political
aggravation capability, which
he exacerbated by irresponsible
class-warfare rhetoric.
This was followed by a 1912 Land Campaign that fortunately came to nothing, another
tax-increasing Budget in 1914, the land tax portions of which became a dead letter
when war broke out, and a further Land Campaign after he had lost office.
The economic reality was that rural landowners had suffered cruelly since 1873
because of unilateral free trade, and by 1910 many of them
were approaching bankruptcy.
In the first year of the war, Lloyd George did not raise taxes sufficiently to finance
war expenditure -- the same mistake made by Pitt in 1793-1800.
He was energetic and notably successful as Minister of Munitions and Secretary of
State for War, bringing in outside businessmen to overcome ossified
bureaucracies, albeit with significant corruption.
During this period he became a believer in “war socialism.” With Press support, he
then ousted Asquith.
As Prime Minister Lloyd George continued energetic but solved few of the problems
that bedevilled Britain’s war effort.
There was little historical memory of the Napoleonic Wars so that it took until April
1917 for the Admiralty to organize a convoy system.
Lloyd George had poisonous relationships with his mediocre top Generals, Robertson
and Haig but his replacement for Robertson was no better.
Lloyd George’s hatred of Haig went so far as to deny him reinforcements in early 1918
(to prevent Haig launching another bloody “Big Push” offensive) which when Germany
attacked in strength in March 1918 nearly proved fatal to the Allied cause.
Lloyd George survived 1917 and the first half of 1918 mostly for lack of acceptable
alternatives, then after July 1918 benefited from massive popular relief as
the final arrival of American forces on the Western Front tipped the scale to Allied
victory. He then secured his peacetime position by leading the Coalition into a
landslide victory at a snap General Election, which promised the electorate a
punitive peace against Germany.
The period’s historical oblivion continued at the 1919 Congress of Versailles, where
Lloyd George imposed punitive peace terms on Germany and its allies.
Woodrow Wilson was mostly responsible for Versailles’ naivete and folly, and Georges
Clemenceau for its vindictiveness, but Lloyd George was a prime mover in making it
the least successful “peace” settlement in history.
Lloyd George’s peacetime coalition was marked by industrial unrest and economic
instability. He continued his interventionist policy, making economic
soap operas out of every strike threat, and undertaking social and housing programs
the country could not afford.
His Irish policy was a vacillating mess, causing four years of civil war.
When in 1922 scandals broke over Lloyd George’s sale of honours, there was an
unsurprising loss of confidence in his leadership, which led to the fall of the
Coalition – Conservatives were so thankful to break free from him that their
back-bench organization is called the “1922 Committee” to this day.
Lloyd George was an unpleasant man, able but corrupt and distrusted by his
colleagues, who made some major blunders and poisoned the atmosphere of British
politics. Overall, he was a below-average prime minister.
Churchill
Winston Churchill entered Parliament in 1900 as a Conservative, then crossed the
floor to Liberal in 1904 over the issue of free trade – throughout his life, his
economic understanding was limited.
He entered the Cabinet in
1908, before moving to the
Home Office and the Admiralty.
At the Admiralty, he built up the Navy aggressively and negotiated the purchase of
a majority stake in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, thus ensuring oil supplies for the
Navy. He also founded Room 40, the seed of the government’s code-breaking operations
in the World Wars and since, now GCHQ.
Then after war began, he promoted the idea of the 1915 Dardanelles Campaign, generally
felt now to have been strategically sound but poorly executed.
He was also instrumental in developing the tank.
Churchill was brought back into the Cabinet by Lloyd George, first as Minister for
Munitions and then as Secretary of State for War, where he favoured an aggressive
campaign against the Russian Bolshevik government.
When the Coalition fell, he fought the 1923 election as a Liberal on a Free Trade
platform, then transitioned to the Conservatives, being rewarded by Baldwin
with the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer.
As Chancellor, he put Britain back on the Gold Standard, with an overvalued pound –
the overvaluation could have been avoided by passing the Imperial Preference tariff
against which he had campaigned in 1923.
As Chancellor, Churchill also opposed defence spending as energetically as he
supported it 15 years earlier or a decade later.
Then he spent ten years “in the wilderness” out of office.
Churchill’s inclusion in the government in September 1939 was inevitable and his
ascension to the top office in May 1940 nearly so, despite his responsibility for
the bungled Norway campaign.
Churchill’s ability to inspire the House of Commons and the British people was a vital
contribution over the next eighteen months.
His personality and oratory also appealed to many Americans; they were essential in
convincing Franklin Roosevelt that Britain was a true ally and worth helping.
Once America entered the war Churchill’s inspirational contribution was less, and he
came close to losing office after the defeats of early 1942.
Churchill was no great military strategist; he favoured the kind of “side-show”
diversions from the main war effort that Pitt and Dundas had favoured in the 1790s.
However, in one respect Churchill’s instincts were sound, in deterring the
United States from a direct invasion of the European mainland until 1944.
Churchill’s relationships with his military commanders were generally good.
On the other hand, his personnel selections were sometimes flawed, notably in
over-promoting the King’s cousin Lord Louis Mountbatten.
His economic management during World War II was minimal – he simply allowed Clement
Attlee, Keynes and the civil servants to build the big-government
command economy that they wanted.
However, there is one major blot on his record: his selection of Maynard Keynes as
the British representative at the Bretton Woods talks in July 1944, which resulted in
the loss of Imperial Preference and 34 years of post-war exchange controls.
Churchill was surprised to lose the 1945 election, but since he had allowed Labour
propagandists throughout the war to demonize the economically successful 1930s,
a short election campaign in
which he referred to them as
the Gestapo did not work.
Then he played an invaluable role with his “Iron Curtain” speech of March 1946 to
awaken President Truman and the West to the continuing dangers
of Stalin’s Soviet Union.
By the time the Conservatives finally won re-election in October
1951, Churchill was almost 77.
In his second term in office he played a successful role in foreign policy, but once
again economics was his weakness.
He began badly by appointing the consensus-minded R.A.
Butler to the Exchequer instead of the ex-City banker Oliver Lyttleton, thus
ensuring that Socialist controls and taxes would be largely left in place.
His biggest single mistake came in January 1952 when the Treasury, the Bank of England
and, surprisingly, Butler, proposed Operation ROBOT, by which the pound would
have been floated and exchange control abandoned.
This would have allowed the British economy to grow without the painful “stop-start”
of incessant sterling crises.
Backed by his two most economically leftist ministers, Anthony Eden and Harold
Macmillan, Churchill vetoed the scheme – a huge opportunity missed.
Rationing was ended in 1954, but taxes came down only marginally.
Part of the problem was Churchill’s excessive deference to the trade unions,
which began the process of stagflationary labour relations surrenders that continued
until Margaret Thatcher’s term in office.
Even with a large boost for 18 crucial months of inspiring war leadership,
Churchill does not rank at the top of the list, as I shall discuss below.
Attlee
The Attlee family were richer than the Churchills and the Attlees had much less
expensive lifestyles.
Thus, after Oxford, Attlee was well able to fund his East End social work and the
early years of his political career while enjoying the occasional comfortable
Continental vacation.
After war service that included Gallipoli, Mesopotamia and the Western Front, Major
Attlee turned his social work and political advocacy into a
safe Labour seat in Limehouse.
After its 1931 wipe-out Labour was reduced to only 46 MPs and Attlee, one of the few
survivors not sponsored by the trades unions, was made deputy leader.
He became leader shortly before the 1935 election, in which Labour’s position
improved to 154 MPs.
Attlee gained credibility with the Labour faithful by supporting the Republicans in
the Spanish Civil War.
Then in 1940, he made one of the leading speeches in the Norway debate that brought
down Chamberlain and became Churchill’s deputy.
His record during World War II deserves more attention and respect than it has
received. He had more experience of the sharp end of modern warfare than Churchill
himself, and the two men had usefully complementary talents.
Attlee, while not a great speaker, was excellent at administration, detail and at
quietening and settling clashes between the big personalities in
the Cabinet and among the military.
Attlee was also active in pushing Labour’s objectives for post-war reconstruction,
seizing on the Beveridge Report when it was published in November 1942 and steering
Butler’s 1944 Education Act onto the statute book.
Economically, the government, mostly but not entirely through its Labour members,
pushed further the “war socialism” of World War I, paving the way for Labour’s
post-war policies.
In July 1945, Attlee’s Labour party won a landslide majority – much to his surprise.
His government came to power with a radical programme, most of which it implemented
within three years of coming to power.
Socially, it was much less radical; the destruction of Establishment institutions
and traditional British attitudes came later.
Aneurin Bevan wrote of Attlee in Tribune: “He brings to the fierce struggle of
politics the tepid enthusiasm of a lazy summer afternoon at a cricket match.” This
made him a highly effective leader of a radical government.
Attlee remained an unabashed patriot in foreign policy, deciding that Britain
needed its own nuclear deterrent, and setting up a program to create one when it
became clear that the United States would not share its technology.
He also believed in a long-term future for the Empire but sent the ineffably inept
Mountbatten to India in 1947 to shepherd through Indian independence,
at a cost of 1 million lives.
Economically, Attlee was a Keynesian – he believed in control of the economy by an
enlightened government, including a substantial degree of state ownership, but
not in full public ownership of industry.
In his time, this was forgivable; capitalism had a relatively poor track
record in the inter-war period, while two wars had shown the allure of “war
socialism” and government controls.
Even in Attlee’s Edwardian youth, the British economy had underperformed other
countries because of Britain’s persistent commitment to unilateral free trade.
On taking office, Attlee embarked on an extensive programme of nationalization,
beginning with the Bank of England, then coal, the railways, electricity, gas,
airlines, long-distance road haulage and later the iron and steel industry.
None of these nationalizations was successful; they tended to run large losses
and acquire highly inefficient management practices, but only road haulage and iron
and steel nationalization were reversed by Churchill’s Conservatives; the remaining
privatisations had to wait for Thatcher.
The Attlee government carried out two major reforms that made a major difference to
the long-term future of the British populace.
The National Insurance Act of 1946 established a universal compulsory national
insurance and old age pensions system.
The second, even more iconic to the electorate today, was the establishment in
1948 of the National Health Service, again initially on a non-contributory basis.
During World War II, Attlee was an effective deputy to Churchill, then after
1945 he implemented an agenda that changed Britain forever.
Despite the failure of his economic vision, he deserves to
rank near the top of the list.
Thatcher
Margaret Thatcher’s father was a prosperous grocer who became an Alderman of their
home town of Grantham; in politics a Gladstonian National Liberal.
She gained a second-class degree in Chemistry at Somerville College, Oxford,
where she was a strident, politically active Conservative in a left-wing college.
After Oxford, she became an industrial chemist, stood twice for election in
Dartford, married a wealthy and strongly Conservative older businessman, became a
barrister and entered the Commons in 1959 as MP for the
North London suburb of Finchley.
From the start Thatcher was on the right of the party.
She was promoted quickly to junior ministerial posts, then served in 1964-70
in shadow economics posts.
In 1970 she was brought into the Cabinet as Minister for Education, this being thought
appropriate women’s work.
Thatcher was an energetic but conventional Education Secretary, abolishing free school
milk deliveries to protect other items of spending and proceeding with a
comprehensive education programme in which she did not believe.
After Edward Heath’s October 1974 second defeat, she launched what appeared a
quixotic bid for the leadership, which she won because of the country’s desperation
with Heath’s incompetence.
She was not a very good Leader of the Opposition, and she was surrounded by
colleagues who almost all disagreed with her, but already she showed the way to a
more robust pursuit of victory in the Cold War: “I stand before you tonight in my Red
Star chiffon evening gown, my face softly made up and my fair hair gently waved, the
Iron Lady of the Western World” she said in a 1976 foreign policy speech.
On gaining office, Thatcher immediately carried out two reforms that made a huge
difference to the British economy: she reduced the top rate of income tax to 60%
and she abolished exchange controls, in force since 1939.
These actions alone justified her election and went beyond anything
her predecessors had done.
Economically, the next few years were very difficult.
“Give me six strong men and true, and I will get through” she said on taking
office, but later ruefully added: “Very rarely did I have as many as six.” Thatcher
survived through sheer determination and by an enormous stroke of luck: the Argentine
invasion of the Falkland Islands.
Thatcher won the 1983 election by a landslide, then embarked on another test of
her courage, the 1984-85 miners’ strike.
Being both determined and competent she won it, though it took a year.
By this time, immeasurably helped by Norman Tebbit she had straightened out trades
union legislation, for the first time since Disraeli’s 1875 Act.
During this second term Thatcher’s privatisations also moved into high gear
with the British Telecom deal, privatizing not only industries that Attlee had
nationalized but also those such as electricity and water supply, state-owned
since pre-war times.
While not always entirely successful, privatization became a trend worldwide.
Thatcher won a third election in 1987 with a majority only slightly reduced.
In her third term, she reduced the top rate of income tax to 40%.
However, her attempt to replace the rates (property tax) by a personal community
charge met with huge opposition.
Nevertheless, by the time of her ouster, the British economy had enjoyed several
years of rapid growth with a new focus on services, while both the public sector and
the budget deficit had been substantially shrunk and inflation had been conquered.
Furthermore, this period saw the fall of the Berlin Wall; her last days in office
were spent at a Paris conference ending the Cold War and signing the largest
disarmament agreement since World War II.
There were inevitably mistakes.
Three stand out:
First, her settlement of the Rhodesia/Zimbabwe question handed the
country over to Marxist guerrillas led by Robert Mugabe, with massacres and
expropriation following.
Second, her financial services legislation eliminated the traditional London merchant
banks and produced a London financial system dominated by foreign-owned trading
juggernauts, with many scandals and little innovation.
Third, Europe.
Thatcher’s Bruges speech of 1988 awakened her supporters to the danger of a unified
European super-state, but it came both too late and too early – too late for her to
have time to devise an alternative plan for Britain’s future and too early for her
colleagues to wake up to the dangers, which took another generation.
As a result, her last years were clouded by leadership challenges.
Thatcher’s contribution to Cold War victory and her economic achievements were beyond
anything Churchill managed.
Even with her mistakes, she should rank near the top of this list.
Liverpool
I have dealt with Liverpool’s achievements at length in Tory Stories Podcast 1.
However, I’d like to summarize his strengths against other great British Prime
Ministers. On economics, he was clearly the best, narrowly ahead of Thatcher.
Unlike her, he did not need to turn the economy around completely; it was already
on the right track, but he understood industrialization and implemented policies
to foster it, notably his Corn Laws which forced Britain to compete as a high-wage
economy. Subsequent prime ministers’ economic policies can best be measured by
how far they fell short of Liverpool’s; none surpassed them.
None of the prime ministers responsible for wars were outstanding in military
strategy, with the exception of Chatham.
Churchill and Pitt were both misguided strategically and Lloyd George was worse,
very nearly losing World War I by bickering with his generals.
Liverpool, while no Chatham, came up with the strategy of steady and moderate
pressure that would wear down Napoleon’s economically illiterate regime, and pursued
it through several difficult years.
While Churchill should get extra points for inspiring war leadership, the
communications technology did not exist for Chatham, Pitt and Liverpool to achieve a
comparable morale effect on the general public, even if they could have.
In domestic policy, Liverpool navigated sure-footedly through the very difficult
post-war years, then relaxed when it was possible to do so, with Peel’s criminal law
reforms representing a substantial liberalization.
Here several prime ministers had comparable achievements, but
none were demonstrably superior.
Overall, therefore, my top five prime ministers would be as follows: (Honourable
Mentions – numbers 6-10 -- Pelham, Chatham, Palmerston, Salisbury, Asquith).
5th: Clement Attlee.
He gets a bonus for excellent service as Churchill’s deputy, and the sheer volume of
changes he implemented was staggering, whatever your views on them.
4th: William Pitt the younger.
He was the pioneer of Industrial Revolution economics, following Gower, producing an
excellent recovery from the American War and a highly productive period to 1792.
However, he was not an especially good war leader.
3rd: Winston Churchill.
His reputation was overblown in the early decades after World War II because of his
inspirational morale-boosting war leadership.
(Attlee was a far better administrator).
His post-war term of office was no more than competent, and not always that.
2nd: Margaret Thatcher.
She gets extra points because of the appalling situation she inherited, and the
mess her successors have made since she departed.
Her economic changes were huge, albeit alas not permanent.
Like all these five leaders, she gets extra points for character.
And 1st: Robert Banks Jenkinson, Lord Liverpool.
Others exceeded him in individual areas, but for all-round successful leadership in
a very difficult period of unprecedented change, he deserves to rank No. 1
Thank you very much for listening.
That is the end of Tory Stories Podcast No. 5